DRA: add text for supporting partitionable device (#18)
pohly/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4381-dra-structured-parameters/README.md

at the moment because admission checks cannot be retried if a check finds
a transient problem.

#### Partitionable devices

In addition to devices, a `ResourceSlice` can also embed a list of
`SharedCapacity` objects. Each `SharedCapacity` object represents some amount
of shared "capacity" that can be consumed by one or more devices listed in the

> slice. No individual device can consume more than the total capacity available
> in a given `SharedCapacity` object, but that is the only restriction. In other

Reviewer: There is really no restriction on the *sum* of the consumed capacity?

For example, this here says "I have 40Gi":
```yaml
 sharedCapacity:
  - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
    capacity: 40Gi
  - name: gpu-0-memory-block-0
    capacity: 1
  - name: gpu-0-memory-block-1
    capacity: 1
  - name: gpu-0-memory-block-2
    capacity: 1
  - name: gpu-0-memory-block-3
    capacity: 1
```

With the definition above, it would be possible to allocate 4 devices which each consume one memory block and 40Gi each.

That cannot be right. It wouldn't even work for the memory blocks, because consuming `gpu-0-memory-block-0` with 1 would not prevent some other device from consuming the same.

I think this is meant:
```suggestion
slice. The sum of consumed capacity may never exceed the total capacity available
in a given `SharedCapacity` object, but that is the only restriction. In other
```

Reviewer 2: yes, correct pohly

Author: That is not correct. What I wrote originally is what I meant.

Reviewer 2: Umm. What is written makes it sound like the resources are not drawn down upon. That is, none of this would work "if that is the only restriction". Multiple devices could consume the same memory slot over and over.

Author: I am writing this from the perspective of how you build up the device objects in the ResourceSlice itself, not how the scheduler will track it when allocating them.

Reviewer 2: Oh, I see, *that* makes more sense. I think we need a little more clarity on that to prevent misunderstanding.

Reviewer: You need to document how the scheduler is meant to handle this information. There has to be some definition of a mathematical invariant that has to be enforced by the scheduler.

"Overlapping" is not a mathematical definition and from the text is is not clear how the scheduler would detect "not overlapping".

Author: I have updated the text at the bottom of the section with more details.

Reviewer: The text below makes sense to me. The "that is the only restriction" statement above and the "can consume overlapping portions" below still don't. Can you perhaps move the precise description up directly after "can be consumed by one or more devices listed in the
slice."?

The rest then can become an illustration of the concept.

Author: Attempting to reword this part now...

Author: Rearranged and reworded. PTAL

    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 20Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-2
      capacity: 1
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-3
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
  - name: gpu-0-first-quarter
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 10Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-0
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
  - name: gpu-0-second-quarter
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 10Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-1
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
  - name: gpu-0-third-quarter
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 10Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-2
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
  - name: gpu-0-fourth-quarter
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 10Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-3
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
```

In this example, `gpu-0-first-half` and `gpu-0-second-half` could be allocated
simultaneouly (because the set of `gpu-0-memory-block`s they consume are
mutually exclusive). However, `gpu-0-first-half` and `gpu-0-first-quarter`

> could not (because `gpu-0-memory-block-0` is consumed by both of them).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could not (because `gpu-0-memory-block-0` is consumed completely by one of these devices).
```

Author: I added the `completely` but I kept the `by both of them` (because they both consume it completely).

To enable this feature, scheduler support will need to be added to track the
set of `SharedCapacity` objects provided by each `ResourceSlice` and ensure

> that no two devices are ever allocated that consume overlapping capacities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that the set of allocated devices does not exceed the available `SharedCapacity`.
```

"overlapping" sounds very specific to MIG. I think it's easier to reason about this model when focusing on the mechanism (sum up consumed resources, compare against total).

Author: Updated the text with more details

at the moment because admission checks cannot be retried if a check finds
a transient problem.

#### Partitionable devices

In addition to devices, a `ResourceSlice` can also embed a list of
`SharedCapacity` objects. Each `SharedCapacity` object represents some amount
of shared "capacity" that can be consumed by one or more devices listed in the
slice. When listing such devices, the sum of the capacity consumed across all

> devices *may* exceed the total amount available in the `SharedCapacity` object.

Reviewer: So *listed devices* may exceed, *allocated devices* must not. That wasn't clear to me before. This is better.

This allows one, for example, to provide a way of logically partition a device
into a set of overlapping sub-devices, each of which "could" be allocated by a
scheduler (just not at the same time).

As such, scheduler support will need to be added to track the set of
`SharedCapacity` objects provided by each `ResourceSlice` as well as perform
the following steps to decide if a given device is a candidate for allocation
or not:

1. Look at the set of `SharedCapacityConsumed` objects referenced by the device
1. For each `SharedCapacityConsumed` object, look and see how much capacity is still available in the `SharedCapacity` object it is tracking with the same name

> 1. If enough capacity is still available in the `SharedCapacity` object to satisfy the devices consumption, continue to consider it for allocation

Reviewer 2: s/devices/device's/

Author: Updated.

1. If not enough capacity is available, move on to the next device
1. Upon deciding to allocate a device, subtract all of the capacity in its `SharedCapacityConsumed` objects from the corresponding `SharedCapacity` objects being tracked
1. Upon freeing a device, add all of the capacity in its `SharedCapacityConsumed` objects back into the corresponding `SharedCapacity` objects being tracked

**Note:** Only devices embedded in the _same_ `ResourceSlice` where a given
`SharedCapacity` is declared have access to that `SharedCapacity`. This
restriction simplifies the logic required to track these capacities in the
scheduler, and shouldn't be too limiting in practice.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add something like this:

Also, note that while it is described as "subtracting" and "adding" capacity in the `SharedCapacity` object, these activities are not written back to the `ResourceSlice`. Just like all summaries of current allocations, they are maintained in-memory by the scheduler based on the totality of device allocations recorded in all claim statuses.

Author: Added

    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-2
      capacity: 1
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-3
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
  - name: gpu-0-first-quarter
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 10Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-0
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
  - name: gpu-0-second-quarter
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 10Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-1
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
  - name: gpu-0-third-quarter
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 10Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-2
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
  - name: gpu-0-fourth-quarter
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-memory
      capacity: 10Gi
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-3
      capacity: 1
    attributes:
    ...
```

In this example, `gpu-0-first-half` and `gpu-0-second-half` could be allocated
simultaneouly (because the set of `gpu-0-memory-block`s they consume are
mutually exclusive). However, `gpu-0-first-half` and `gpu-0-first-quarter`
could not (because `gpu-0-memory-block-0` is consumed completely by both of

> them).

Reviewer: In this example, does "gpu-0-shared-memory" matter? In other words, is there a combination of devices which is only disallowed because of it?

Reviewer: When I play this out in my head, it looks like defining `gpu-0-memory-block-[0-3]` should be sufficient to rule out conflicting devices. Then `gpu-0-shared-memory` can be removed to make the example simpler.

Reviewer: You can instead define it as an attribute. That illustrates the different sizes of the devices and is how a CEL selector would pick one.

Author: Yeah, let me do that.

Author: Updated.

    VersionValue *string
}

type SharedCapacity struct {

>     // Name is a unique identifier for this shared capacity.

Reviewer: Unique in which scope?

Author: Updated.

    //
    // It is referenced both when defining the total amount of shared capacity

>     // that is available, as well as by individual a devices when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // that is available, as well as by individual devices when
```

    // +optional
    Attributes []DeviceAttribute

    // SharedCapacityConsumed defines the set of shared capacity consumed by
    // this device.
    //
    // Must not have more than 256 entries.
    //
    // +listType=atomic
    // +optional
    SharedCapacityConsumed []SharedCapacity
}

const ResourceSliceMaxAttributesPerDevice = 32

> const ResourceSliceMaxSharedCapacityConsumedPerDevice = 256

Reviewer 2: Just curious, in the MIG case how many fully partitionable GPUs does this allow in a single `ResourceSlice`?

Author: There are 7 shared capacities per GPU, so `floor(256/7) = 36`

Author: I've dropped this to 128, per patrick's comment below. It can now only handle. I was also wrong about it being 7 capacities. It is actually 14 because we don't treat the memory blocks as a single "range" value (but rather 8 distinct capacities).

This gives us `floor(128/14) = 9`.

So I can fit all GPUs from in an 8 GPU server in one slice, but would need 2 slices for a server with 16 GPUs.

    // +optional
    Attributes []DeviceAttribute

    // SharedCapacityConsumed defines the set of shared capacity consumed by
    // this device.
    //
    // Must not have more than 32 entries.
    //
    // +listType=atomic
    // +optional
    SharedCapacityConsumed []SharedCapacity
}

const ResourceSliceMaxAttributesPerDevice = 32

> const ResourceSliceMaxSharedCapacityConsumedPerDevice = 32

Reviewer: So before, a ResourceSlice could be as large as ~420KB (see "ResourceSliceMaxDevices and ResourceSliceMaxAttributesPerDevice were chosen" comment).

Let's see how much bigger it becomes because of the new data....

Each SharedCapacity is ~40 bytes (ignoring overhead). We have 32 (per device) * 128 (devices) of them in the device list and 256 in the `spec.sharedCapacity`. That makes 170KB, right?

That seems a bit much compared to what we budgeted previously for the device list. Perhaps `ResourceSliceMaxSharedCapacity = 128` and `ResourceSliceMaxSharedCapacityConsumedPerDevice = 16`?

Then we have 85KB, which seems reasonable to me.

If one MIG really only needs these four memory blocks from the example, then 32 MIGs can be define per node in one ResourceSlice.

Reviewer: Except that it's 7 per MIG (https://github.com/pohly/enhancements/pull/18#discussion_r1636625517), so it would be only 18. Perhaps we have to keep ResourceSliceMaxSharedCapacity at 256?

Reviewer: @klueska whatever we pick, can you extend the "were chosen" comment?

Reviewer: We don't need to finalize the decision, but the KEP should at least explain the choices and consequences, so I'm also fine with the current numbers.

Author: Each device will only have 7 entries, indicating how much capacity it consumes from each.

Author: Oh right, the memory blocks aren't a single entry anymore, so it becomes 6+8 = 14 entries per device (so it would still fit within the 16 limit if that's the route you want to go).

Reviewer: I am thinking of ResourceSliceMaxSharedCapacity = 128. That allows defining the blocks of 128 / 14 = 9 MIGs per node, if I am not mistaken. Seems a bit low?

Author: Updated. I left it at 32 entries per device, but dropped it to 128 total entries in the slice.

Author: I'm not sure what you mean by `9 MIGs per node`. I can model up to 9 full GPUs, each of which has 15 possible devices that can be built from that (1 full GPU and 14 MIG devices). That makes 135 total devices (which is then limited to 128 by the number of allowed devices).

Meaning, at the end of the day, I can only actually model up to 8 full GPUs, each of which has 15 possible devices that can be built from that (1 full GPU and 14 MIG devices) = 120 devices.

This is the standard number of GPUs available in modern server systems. Some systems have 16, but I think being able to support up to 8 in one slice is a reasonable amount.

Reviewer: I was thinking of the size of the `slice.spec.sharedCapacity` slice. All MIGs need to put "their" capacities there, so depending on how many are needed per MIG, that could have been the limiting factor - but it wasn't, because you already hit the `slice.spec.devices` limit.

    //
    // SharedCapacity names must be a C-style identifier (e.g. "the_name") with
    // a maximum length of 32.
    //
    // By limiting these names to a C-style identifier, the same validation can
    // be used for both these names and the identifier portion of a
    // DeviceAttribute name.
    //
    // +required
    Name string `json:"name"`

    // Capacity is the total capacity of the named resource.
    // This can either represent the total *available* capacity, or the total
    // capacity *consumed*, depending on the context where it is referenced.
    //
    // +required
    Capacity resource.Quantity `json:"capacity"`
}

// CStyleIdentifierMaxLength is the maximum length of a c-style identifier used for naming.
const CStyleIdentifierMaxLength = 32

// DeviceAttributeMaxIDLength is the maximum length of the identifier in a device attribute name (`<domain>/<ID>`).
const DeviceAttributeMaxIDLength = CStyleIdentifierMaxLength

// DeviceAttributeMaxValueLength is the maximum length of a string or version attribute value.
const DeviceAttributeMaxValueLength = 64

// SharedCapacityMaxNameLength is the maximum length of a shared capacity name.

> const DeviceAttributeMaxIDLength = CStyleIdentifierMaxLength

Reviewer: Variable doesn't match comment.

```suggestion
const SharedCapacityMaxNameLength = CStyleIdentifierMaxLength
```

Author: updated
